---
layout: post
title: Proving that ζ(2) = π<sup>2</sup>/6 with your eyes closed
slug: ζ2
author: Florent Dufour
date: 2022-06-16
#modified: 
location: Berlin
category: [math]
math: true
---

"Next time you go clubbing, ask around what's the sum over k of 1 / k<sup>2</sup>" once said my math teacher. "You'll see who's worth partying with".<!--more-->

Here's what you need to know:

$$
\zeta(2) = \sum_{k=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{k^2} = \frac{\pi^2}{6}
$$

While Euler was the first to prove the identity in 1740[^euler_1740], a handful of other modern approaches have been proposed since then[^chapman_2003]:

1. By using a monotone convergence[^apostol_1983]
1. By using the Jacobian Matrix[^chapman_2003]
1. By using the power series for the inverse sine function[^choe_1987]
1. By using the L<sup>2</sup>-completeness of the trigonometric functions[^chapman_2003]
1. By using the convergence of Fourier series[^chapman_2003]
1. By using uniform convergence of a power series on the real line[^chapman_2003]
1. By using an infinite product for the sine function[^euler_1740]
1. By using the calculus of residues[^chapman_2003]
1. By using cotangente inequalities[^apostol_1974]
1. By using the MacLaurin expansion[^kortram_1996]
1. By using the reduction of integral[^matsuoka_1961]
1. By using the identity for the Fejér kernel[^stark_1969]
1. By using Gregory’s formula and infinite limits[^borwein_1987]
1. By using the formula for the number of representations of a positive integer as a sum of four squares[^hua_2012]

I was recently reminded of the Jacobian Matrix, let's use this method for example.

---

_Before beginning:_

We know that[^chapman_2003]

$$
\frac{3}{4} \zeta(2) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^2} - \sum_{m=1}^{\infty}\frac{1}{(2m)^2} = \sum_{r=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{(2r + 1)^2},
$$

and that

$$
\sum_{r=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{(2r + 1)^2} = \frac{\pi^2}{8}.
$$

We also note that

$$
\frac{1}{n^2} = \int_{0}^{1}\int_{0}^{1} x^{n-1} y^{n-1} dx\:dy,
$$

gives

$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{n^2} = \int_{0}^{1}\int_{0}^{1} \frac{dx\:dy}{1-xy}
$$


by monotonous convergence[^apostol_1983].

---

We start considering the monotonous convergence:

$$
\sum_{r=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{(2r + 1)^2} = \int_{0}^{1}\int_{0}^{1} \frac{dx\:dy}{1-x^2y^2}.
$$

Let's use the substitution

$$
(u, v) = \left( \tan^{-1} x \sqrt{\frac{1-y^2}{1-x^2}}, \tan^{-1} y \sqrt{\frac{1-x^2}{1-y^2}} \right),
$$

so that

$$
(x, y) = \left( \frac{\sin u}{\cos v}, \frac{\sin v}{\cos u} \right).
$$

The Jacobian matrix is:

$$
\begin{align*}
    \frac{\partial(x, y)}{\partial(u, v)}
        &= \begin{vmatrix}
            \cos u / \cos v & \sin u \sin v / \cos^2 v\\
            \sin u \sin v / \cos^2u & \cos v / \cos u
        \end{vmatrix} \\
    &= 1- \frac{\sin^2 u \sin^2 v}{\cos^2 u \cos^2 v} \\
    &= 1-x^2y^2.
\end{align*}
$$

We get:

$$
\frac{3}{4} \zeta(2) = \int\int_{A} du\:dv,
$$

where

$$
A = \{ (u, v) : u \gt 0, \: v \gt 0, \: u+v \lt \pi/2 \}
$$

<p>
has area \( \pi^2/8 \), giving <em>\( \zeta(2) = \pi^2 / 6 \)</em>.
</p>

[^apostol_1983]: [Apostol, Tom M. "A proof that Euler missed: evaluating ζ (2) the easy way." The Mathematical Intelligencer 5.3 (1983): 59-60.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF03026576)
[^euler_1740]: [Euler, Leonhard. "De summis serierum reciprocarum." Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae (1740): 123-134.](https://scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/euler-works/41/)
[^chapman_2003]: [Evaluating ζ(2), Robin Chapman, Department of Mathematics University of Exeter (2003)](http://secamlocal.ex.ac.uk/people/staff/rjchapma/etc/zeta2.pdf)
[^choe_1987]: [Choe, Boo Rim. "An Elementary Proof of Σn=1 1/n2 = π2/6." The American Mathematical Monthly 94.7 (1987): 662-663.](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.2307/2322220)
[^matsuoka_1961]: [Matsuoka, Yoshio. "An Elementary Proof of the Formula Σk=1 1/k2 = π2/6." The American Mathematical Monthly 68.5 (1961): 485-487.](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2311110)
[^apostol_1974]: [Apostol, T. "Mathematical Analysis, Addison-Welsey." Reading, MA 2 (1974).](http://www.ru.ac.bd/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2019/03/205_04_Apostol-Mathematical-Analysis-1973.pdf)
[^kortram_1996]: [Kortram, R. A. (1996). Simple Proofs for and sin. Mathematics Magazine, 69(2), 122-125.]()
[^stark_1969]: [Stark, E. L. (1969). Another Proof of the Formula Σk=1 1/k2=π2/6. The American Mathematical Monthly, 76(5), 552-553.]()
[^borwein_1987]: [Borwein, J. M., & Borwein, P. B. (1987). Pi and the AGM: a study in the analytic number theory and computational complexity. Wiley-Interscience.](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/40700)
[^hua_2012]: [Hua, L. K. (2012). Introduction to number theory. Springer Science & Business Media.](http://math.fau.edu/yiu/PSRM2015/yiu/Oldwebsites/NT2002/NT2002notes.pdf)